2024 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) | 979-8-3503-5067-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CoG60054.2024.10645672

Ancestor-Based α-β Bounds for
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
Tom Pepels

Mark H.M. Winands

Department of Advanced Computing Sciences
Maastricht University
Maastricht, The Netherlands
tom.pepels@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Department of Advanced Computing Sciences
Maastricht University
Maastricht, The Netherlands
m.winands@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Abstract—Upper Confidence bounds applied to Trees (UCT)
is the default selection policy in Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS), yet it overlooks the strategic use of ancestral node
information. Consequently, UCT approaches each decision level
as an independent Multi-Armed Bandit problem, disregarding
the results achieved along the path that led to the current state.
Consequently, it treats decisions as separate in the tree, without
integrating the historical context of previous choices. This paper
introduces an enhancement to UCT for two-player, deterministic
zero-sum games by integrating insights from α-β pruning—a
method that increases minimax search efficiency through selective
pruning. We propose a revised selection policy that leverages
ancestor node data, mirroring α-β pruning’s principle, to refine sample-based search. Our experiments with this enhanced
method reveal performance gains in Breakthrough, Mini Shogi,
and GoMoku, highlighting the effectiveness of incorporating
ancestor search results into the MCTS selection processes.
Index Terms—MCTS, UCT, Monte-Carlo, Search, Games

I. I NTRODUCTION

MONTE-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) plays a crucial
role in AI for games, excelling in large sequential
search spaces. Initially boosting computer Go from amateur to near-professional levels [1], [2], MCTS improved on
minimax methods without needing game-specific heuristics.
Combined with deep reinforcement learning, MCTS enabled
breakthroughs such as AlphaGo [3] and has applications in
video games [4], [5], general game-playing [6], and planning
and optimization [7], [8].
This paper introduces a selection policy for MCTS that integrates α (lower) and β (upper) bounds, akin to α−β pruning
[9], within the Upper Confidence bounds for Trees (UCT) tree
policy. This enhancement aims at improving strategic decision
making by accounting for the path-dependent nature of game
state progressions. We modify UCT to consider the numerical
distance between these bounds, and we apply our revised
algorithm to the following two-player zero-sum games: Amazons, Breakthrough, Mini Shogi, and GoMoku, to evaluate
the effects of our changes. Although enhancing simulationbased algorithms with the α − β and minimax techniques
has been proposed in earlier works [10], [11] our technique
is unique in two ways. First, it does not require additional
979-8-3503-5067-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

domain knowledge, yet it still leverages heuristics. Second, our
method seamlessly incorporates into the standard MCTS/UCT
framework, requiring minimal re-engineering without increasing computational or storage complexity.
This paper is organized as follows. First, Section II presents
an overview of MCTS. Next, Section III discusses the rationale
for incorporating α and β bounds into the algorithm and
explains how these bounds are integrated into UCT. Section IV
presents the experimental results from testing on selected
games, demonstrating the advantages of our method for AI
game play. Finally, in Section V we present conclusions and
an outlook for future research.
II. M ONTE -C ARLO T REE S EARCH
MCTS [1], [12] is a best-first search method used widely
in game-playing, exploring state spaces by building statistical
evidence for decisions. MCTS excels in large search spaces
where full exploration is not feasible. As an iterative algorithm, its performance improves with additional search time.
Each iteration in MCTS, known as a simulation, includes
four distinct phases executed sequentially until the allocated
computational resources are exhausted: Selection descends the
tree from root to leaf or terminal state, selecting nodes by tree
policy, Expansion adds new child nodes for unexplored states
unless at a terminal state, Playout executes a random playout
from the current state to a terminal state, obtaining payoffs,
Backpropagation updates statistics of nodes along the path
from leaf to root based on simulation outcomes.
The tree policy, essential for balancing exploration and
exploitation during the selection phase, generally relies on the
UCT [12] formula. It is an adaptation of the UCB1 algorithm
from multi-armed bandit (MAB) theory [13], designed to minimize cumulative regret over a series of independent decisions:
s
!
Q(s, a)
ln N (s)
argmaxa
+C
(1)
N (s, a)
N (s, a)
Here, Q(s, a) represents the mean outcome of performing
action a in state s, N (s, a) denotes the number of times action
a has been sampled in state s, N (s) indicates the number of
visits to state s, and C is a constant that manages the trade-off
between exploration and exploitation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DA BAHIA. Downloaded on April 10,2026 at 19:02:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. α-β B OUNDS FOR MCTS
Our proposed enhancement is based on the notion that
MCTS ultimately simplifies its decision-making process by
treating each node as an isolated MAB, thus it neglects the current decision’s historical context. Because UCT only accounts
for the immediate parent’s statistics, it misses insights from
the decision path that led to the current state. Therefore, our
proposal integrates ancestral information into UCT, enriching
decisions with a path-dependent context and moving beyond
the view of tree nodes as independent MAB challenges.
Algorithm 1 α-β MCTS Selection
1: while s is expanded do
2:
if maximizing then
3:
if α < V (s, a) − CB(s, a) then
4:
α = V (s, a) − CB(s, a)
5:
α− = −CB(s, a)
6:
end if
7:
s ← U CTαβ (s, α, β, α− , β+ )
8:
else if minimizing then
9:
if β > V (s, a) + CB(s, a) then
10:
β = V (s, a) + CB(s, a)
11:
β+ = CB(s, a)
12:
end if
13:
s ← U CTαβ (s, 1 − β, 1 − α, −β+ , −α− )
14:
end if
15: end while
q
ln N (s)
Q(s,a)
,
CB(s,
a)
=
C
V (s, a) = N
αβ
(s,a)
N (s,a)
The function U CTαβ is defined in subsection III-A, Eq. 4.

Inspired by minimax, the technique incorporates ancestral
bounds (α and β) into the MCTS selection phase. In contrast to
minimax, it allows α and β to intersect, and the bounds are dynamically adjusted using UCT instead of having exact values
based on cousin nodes. Although this technique diverges from
the traditional α − β method, its goal in MCTS is consistent
with that of minimax, using the values of other nodes to
direct the search; therefore, we adopt the same terminology.
Our approach enhances selection by incorporating path information and adjusting α and β, based on current evaluations
and confidence bounds. This process dynamically refines the
outcome predictions, leveraging path-led information to inform
the selection strategy more accurately.
During selection, before selecting the next node to explore,
α and β, initially set to −∞ and ∞, respectively, are dynamically adjusted using the value function V (s, a) and confidence
bounds CB(s, a), as detailed in Algorithm 1. α and β, as well
as their corresponding lower and upper confidence bounds α−
and β+ are revised, following these steps:
1) If the current α is lower than the value of taking action a
in state s minus the confidence bound, then α is updated
to this new value, encapsulating the lower bound of the
achievable score range. Furthermore, α− is set to the lower
confidence bound of α.

Fig. 1. An example illustrating α and β updates during MCTS selection.

2) On minimizing plies, if β is greater than the value of action
a plus the confidence bound, β is updated to reflect this
upper limit of the score range for the maximizing player
along the current path.
3) The Cαβ constant is introduced in the CB function such
that the size of the bounds for the α − β can be optimized
separate from UCT’s C constant.
4) The call to UCT selection is adapted by inverting α, β,
α− , and β+ for the minimizing player. Such inversions are
dependent on the range of rewards and averages. In the
case shown in Algorithm 1, playout rewards and V (s, a)
fall within a [0, 1] range for maximizing players.
Figure 1 illustrates a selective descent through the MCTS
tree from the root, highlighting only the chosen nodes at each
ply. Initially, the nodes are chosen using standard UCT since
the values of α and β are not yet defined. Starting from
the third ply, selection is directed by UCTαβ , with α and
β dynamically adjusted according to the nodes chosen up to
that point. In a typical Breakthrough match, using 100,000
simulations per move, UCTαβ accounts for 58% of selections
for the first ten moves, rising to 94% as the match nears
its end. The increase can be attributed to the more distinct
separation between good and bad moves, as well as a decrease
in the branching factor, enabling deeper search. In contrast, in
Amazons on an 8 × 8 board with the same budget, UCTαβ
starts influencing selections only after the first nine moves with
45% of selections, and peaking at 78% by the twentieth move.
The game’s large branching factor limiting the depth of search
thus also limiting the use of UCTαβ .
In a single simulation from the tree root to the leaf, the
iterative adjustment of α and β, along with their bounds
(α− and β+ ), progressively narrows these bounds towards
more precise estimates. At the start of each simulation, α
and β are reset, ensuring that they are derived solely from

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DA BAHIA. Downloaded on April 10,2026 at 19:02:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the current selection path. This systematically improves the
accuracy of the bounds based on the accumulated simulation
data. Although these values are not definitive upper and lower
bounds due to incomplete exploration, they still offer valuable
insight into the characteristics of the current path, such as its
potential as the principal variation, its exploration frequency
and whether the bounds have intersected.
A. α-β Bounds for UCT
The goal is to use α and β to enhance the UCT-driven
selection process in MCTS, acknowledging two key scenarios:
1) α < β indicating a path of exploitation where the algorithm
focuses on promising paths identified earlier.
2) α > β indicates deviation from the optimal path, signaling
the need to explore possible better paths that have not been
previously considered.
This insight proposes a change to the UCT formula that
dynamically modifies the trade-off between exploration and
exploitation according to the conditions of α and β, particularly modifying the exploration component.
δαβ = 1 − (β − α) · (1 − (β+ − α− )),

(2)

and
2
∆αβ = Cαβ
· ln(δαβ · N (s)),

(3)

Given ∆αβ ̸= 0, the UCT formula is then modified as follows:
s
!
∆αβ · ln N (s)
Q(s, a)
+C
(4)
argmaxa
N (s, a)
N (s, a)
The constant Cαβ in the CB function in Algorithm 1 is also
used here to adjust the influence of ∆αβ on exploration.
1) Formula 2 defines δαβ as a measure of the disparity
between β and α, taking into consideration the interval
between their limits to reflect uncertainty. This metric
decreases as the uncertainty increases or as β and α
converge, and turns negative when β < α, emulating
minimax pruning. Note that β+ is strictly positive, while
α− is negative, hence the overall effect is scaled relative
to the certainty of α and β.
2) Formula 3 adjusts UCT by incorporating ∆αβ , affecting
exploration depending on the value of δαβ . The adjustment
of the exploration term is further controlled by N (s),
ensuring a stronger impact on well-explored nodes than
on lesser-visited ones, thus requiring substantial evidence
before altering the exploration strategy.
3) When ∆αβ = 0, or β = −∞ and/or α = ∞ (indicating
undefined bounds), the standard UCT selection formula 1
is used. In all other cases, formula 4 is used.
In summary, the U CTαβ approach aims to modulate search
dynamics by tuning exploration based on the directions of the
α and β bounds. Specifically, it adjusts the algorithm’s focus
over time, changing the exploration/exploitation balance. Potentially guiding the search towards more promising areas by
scaling exploration intensity according to the relative positions
of α and β, based on the state’s ancestors.

IV. E XPERIMENTS
This section presents our experimental approach and results,
comparing UCTαβ enhancement to standard UCT.
A. Experimental Setup
In our experiments, MCTSαβ is tested on four board games:
Breakthrough, Amazons, Mini Shogi, and GoMoku, chosen for
their unique game-play characteristics and search challenges.
Breakthrough offers narrow winning lines; Amazons has a
large branching factor; Mini Shogi involves condensed strategic play with endgame focus; GoMoku emphasizes strategic
placement and creating winning patterns. These games provide
a wide-ranging test of MCTSαβ ’s versatility and performance
across different game dynamics. A pie rule is implemented to
mitigate the first-player bias in Gomoku. All other games use
a conventional rule-set.
The experimental framework is implemented in Cython to
take advantage of Python’s ease and C’s efficiency1 . Parameter
tuning involved a broad initial exploration and a subsequent
refinement phase to identify optimal settings per domain. The
parameter Cαβ was tuned last and independently of all other
parameters. For all domains, we observe that |C −Cαβ | ≤ 0.2.
Our experimental setup includes the following enhancements:
1) Implicit Minimax Backups: integrating minimax evaluations with MCTS backpropagation [14].
2) Early Playout Termination: stopping playouts after a set
number of moves, results given by state evaluation [15].
3) Informed Playouts: a combination of heuristics and ϵgreedy best-move selection, to improve playout quality in
Breakthrough, Gomoku, and Mini Shogi.
To distinguish between the enhancements used in our experiments, all of which use early termination and informed
playouts, we use the notation explained in Table I.
TABLE I
N OTATION USED IN EXPERIMENTS

Notation

Description

MCTSαβ
MCTSimm
MCTS

MCTS with U CTαβ
MCTS with implicit minimax backups
Standard MCTS and UCT

To ensure fairness in our experiments, players alternate
starting positions in half of the games. To introduce significant
variability between matches, we employ an MCTS agent with
a high exploration constant (C) to determine the first two
moves. This agent conducts a 40-second search, and each
player then chooses their first move from the top 40% of
the options generated by the agent. For Gomoku, where there
are 225 possible opening moves, this translates to about 90
choices per player. Consequently, these selections can lead to
around 8100 unique board configurations after the two initial
moves, not accounting for rotational symmetry or potential
overlaps. This exploratory set-up is also applied consistently
across other games in our study. Following the initial moves,
1 Framework available at: https://github.com/tpepels/mcts python

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DA BAHIA. Downloaded on April 10,2026 at 19:02:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II
C OMBINED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Game

Simulation
budget

MCTSαβ,imm vs.
MCTSimm

MCTSαβ vs.
MCTS

Amazons (8 × 8)

75,000
150,000
225,000

Mean ± 95% c.i.

Mean ± 95% c.i.

50.99 ± 2.88
48.63 ± 2.83
50.71 ± 2.83

52.08 ± 2.80
48.67 ± 2.82
53.34 ± 2.88

Gomoku

75,000
150,000
225,000

52.69 ± 2.75
54.91 ± 2.73
53.57 ± 2.79

50.88 ± 2.77
49.69 ± 2.75
51.16 ± 2.77

Breakthrough

75,000
150,000
225,000

53.35 ± 3.07
56.82 ± 3.04
54.30 ± 3.02

52.44 ± 3.03
54.64 ± 3.08
55.37 ± 3.07

Mini Shogi

25,000
50,000
75,000

57.16 ± 3.05
62.75 ± 2.99
59.94 ± 3.15

54.61 ± 2.99
56.51 ± 3.07
58.24 ± 2.97

the games proceed with players continuing to use MCTS, and
are allocated a fixed simulation budget for each move.”
B. Experimental Results
Table II presents the results of at least 1,000 matches per
experiment, showing win rates for MCTSαβ with a 95%
confidence interval across various computational budgets.
The experimental results show variable performance impacts
when applying MCTSαβ to different games. In Breakthrough
and Mini Shogi, the use of MCTSαβ results in a statistically
significant increase in win rates across all except one of
the budgets tested. These games, which emphasize endgame
strategy, demonstrate that enhanced UCT selection utilizing
ancestral node data effectively improves performance in scenarios with a limited number of paths to victory.
Conversely, in Amazons and Gomoku, while there are
improvements in some cases, these are overall less substantial.
Specifically, in Amazons, there appears to be a modest but
significant performance improvement at the highest budget
level. This suggests that the high initial branching factor in
Amazons may limit the depth of search, thereby preventing
the initialization of α and β (as outlined in Subsection III).
In Gomoku, the experimental data indicate that without implicit minimax, the performance benefits of MCTSαβ are neither pronounced nor significant. However, although Gomoku
shares a similar wide-to-narrow branching factor as Amazons,
results shows that with adequate computational resources, it
benefits from the combination of αβ, imm. This implies that
implicit minimax is crucial in guiding the search towards
promising paths and avoiding pitfalls. In this case, Gomoku’s
performance improves significantly up to 54.91% with a
sufficiently large computational budget. It is conceivable that
dedicating additional computational resources could potentially lead to comparable enhancements in Amazons.
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE R ESEARCH
Results indicate that the effectiveness of the MCTSαβ
approach is related to the strategic depth of the domain and
the size of its search space. Games such as Breakthrough

and Minishogi, which call for accurate implementation of a
smaller range of strategic moves, benefit significantly from
enhancing UCT with α − β bounds derived from ancestor
nodes. Traditional MCTS methods can struggle under these
conditions because they average over many possible outcomes.
Conversely, games such as Amazons and Gomoku, which
begin with a multitude of potential strategies that are quite
similar and depend on pattern formation, might see reduced
advantages. Future investigations will determine whether this
approach can improve performance in these areas while also
boosting overall search efficiency relative to standard UCT. In
addition, examining the theoretical guarantees of convergence
will be a topic of future research.
Acknowledgment: This research used the Dutch national einfrastructure with the support of the SURF Cooperative using
grant no. EINF-6985.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Coulom, “Efficient selectivity and backup operators in Monte-Carlo
tree search,” in 5th International Conference on Computers and Games,
ser. LNCS, H. J. van den Herik, P. Ciancarini, and H. H. L. M. Donkers,
Eds., vol. 4630. Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 72–83.
[2] S. Gelly, L. Kocsis et al., “The grand challenge of computer Go: Monte
Carlo tree search and extensions,” Commun. ACM, vol. 55, no. 3, p.
106–113, mar 2012.
[3] D. Silver, A. Huang et al., “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural
networks and tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489,
2016.
[4] T. Pepels, M. H. M. Winands, and M. Lanctot, “Real-time monte carlo
tree search in Ms Pac-Man,” IEEE Transactions on Computational
Intelligence and AI in Games, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 245–257, 2014.
[5] D. J. N. J. Soemers, C. F. Sironi, T. Schuster, and M. H. M. Winands,
“Enhancements for real-time monte-carlo tree search in general video
game playing,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence
and Games (CIG), 2016, pp. 1–8.
[6] H. Finnsson and Y. Björnsson, “Learning simulation control in general
game playing agents,” in Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2010, pp. 954–959.
[7] C. B. Browne, E. Powley et al., “A survey of Monte Carlo tree search
methods,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in
Games, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2012.
[8] M. Świechowski, K. Godlewski, B. Sawicki, and J. Mańdziuk, “Monte
carlo tree search: a review of recent modifications and applications,”
Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 2497–2562, 2023.
[9] D. Knuth and R. Moore, “An analysis of alpha-beta pruning,” Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 293–326, 1975.
[10] H. Baier and M. H. M. Winands, “MCTS-minimax hybrids with state
evaluations,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 62, pp.
193–231, 2018.
[11] B. Huang, “Pruning game tree by rollouts,” Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 1, Feb. 2015.
[12] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári, “Bandit-based Monte Carlo planning,”
in 15th European Conference on Machine Learning, ser. LNCS,
J. Fürnkranz, T. Scheffer, and M. Spiliopoulou, Eds., vol. 4212.
Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 282–293.
[13] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of the
multiarmed bandit problem,” Machine Learning, vol. 47, no. 2-3, pp.
235–256, 2002.
[14] M. Lanctot, M. H. M. Winands, T. Pepels, and N. R. Sturtevant, “Monte
carlo tree search with heuristic evaluations using implicit minimax
backups,” in 2014 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and
Games. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[15] R. Lorentz, “Amazons discover Monte-Carlo,” in Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Computers and Games (CG), ser. LNCS,
vol. 5131, 2008, pp. 13–24.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DA BAHIA. Downloaded on April 10,2026 at 19:02:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.


